.windsurf/workflows/run-pipeline.md, before:

---
description: Run the full extraction pipeline on a protocol PDF and verify output
---

## Steps

1. Confirm the input PDF path exists. Default location: `input/trial/NCT<id>/` or `input/`.

2. Run the pipeline:
```
python main_v3.py --input <path_to_pdf> --output output/<protocol_id>/ --model gpt-4o
```

3. Check the output directory for:
   - `protocol_usdm.json` — the USDM v4.0 JSON
   - `m11_protocol.docx` — the M11-formatted DOCX
   - `m11_conformance_report.json` — conformance validation results
   - `run_manifest.json` — pipeline run metadata

4. Review conformance report:
```
python -c "import json; r = json.load(open('output/<protocol_id>/m11_conformance_report.json')); print(f'Score: {r.get(\"overall_score\", \"N/A\")}'); print(f'Errors: {len(r.get(\"errors\", []))}'); print(f'Warnings: {len(r.get(\"warnings\", []))}')"
```

5. If errors exist, check:
   - Missing extraction phases (check `run_manifest.json` for which phases ran)
   - LLM failures (check console output for warnings)
   - Schema validation issues (run `/validate-usdm` workflow)

Commit message:

v7.12: Procedure code enrichment, graph viewer editing & cross-references, anchor nodes, timeline popout fix
Features:
- Procedure code enrichment: multi-system terminology (NCI, SNOMED, ICD-10, CPT, LOINC)
  via embedded 60+ procedure DB + EVS API fallback, x-procedureCodes extension
- Graph viewer: NodeDetailsPanel rewrite with human-readable cross-references,
  clickable navigation between nodes, inline editing wired to semantic store
- Graph anchors: dedicated diamond nodes from executionModel.timeAnchors with
  keyword-matched encounter alignment and dashed amber edges
- Timeline popout fix: position-aware alignment prevents edge clipping

UI:
- ProceduresDevicesView: all procedure codes as clickable CodeLink badges
- NodeDetailsPanel: EntityLink cross-refs, InlineEdit for name/description,
  undo/redo buttons, edit mode awareness
- TimelineCanvas: selectNode() API for programmatic cross-node navigation
- Cytoscape theme: anchor-edge style (dashed amber)

Tests: 981 passed, 36 skipped, 0 failures, 0 TS errors
Docs: CHANGELOG v7.12, README What's New, project structure updated

.windsurf/workflows/run-pipeline.md, after:

---
description: Run the full extraction pipeline on a protocol PDF and verify output
auto_execution_mode: 3
---

## Steps

1. Confirm the input PDF path exists. Default location: `input/trial/NCT<id>/` or `input/`.

2. Run the pipeline (do NOT pass --model unless the user explicitly requests it):
```
python main_v3.py <path_to_pdf> --complete --parallel --output-dir output/<protocol_id>
```
   Add `--sap <sap_pdf>` and/or `--sites <sites_csv>` if available.

3. Check the output directory for:
   - `protocol_usdm.json` — the USDM v4.0 JSON
   - `m11_protocol.docx` — the M11-formatted DOCX
   - `m11_conformance_report.json` — conformance validation results
   - `run_manifest.json` — pipeline run metadata

4. Review conformance report:
```
python -c "import json; r = json.load(open('output/<protocol_id>/m11_conformance_report.json')); print(f'Score: {r.get(\"overall_score\", \"N/A\")}'); print(f'Errors: {len(r.get(\"errors\", []))}'); print(f'Warnings: {len(r.get(\"warnings\", []))}')"
```

5. If errors exist, check:
   - Missing extraction phases (check `run_manifest.json` for which phases ran)
   - LLM failures (check console output for warnings)
   - Schema validation issues (run `/validate-usdm` workflow)
